[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The idea that there have been
ages where women once ruled is
not new.
Archaeologists
have found evidence
pointing to several
examples of societies
that were matriarchal.
And yet for many
mainstream historians,
this concept is
still unsettling.
In a 2017 study, a
team of scientists
led by archaeologist Douglas
Kennett of Pennsylvania State
University found evidence
of a matrilineal society
in New Mexico's Chaco Canyon.
The remains of 14
women were discovered
beneath a dazzling cache of more
than 15,000 turquoise necklaces
and pieces of shell jewelry.
The remnants of these
women were found
in an elite series
of burial chambers
that marked them as among the
most noble members of Chacoan
society.
And astoundingly, under
closer examination,
it was revealed that no fewer
than nine of the individuals
shared the exact
same matrilineal
DNA which is passed only
from mother to child,
concluding that power and
influence was passed down
through the female line.
Archaeologists are
now finding that there
have been many
ancient cultures that
once worshipped female deities.
>> There clearly was a time
in remote antiquity when
the feminine, the female, was
regarded as the single most
important aspect of humanity.
And-- and you have--
going back at
least 30,000 years,
deep into the upper
paleolithic, you have these--
they're referred to
as "goddess figures."
These are large-breasted,
large-hipped female figures.
They're the dominant
iconography of that period.
And that-- and that
iconography continues
all the way down through
the upper paleolithic
and into the neolithic.
There was a time when
our ancestors venerated
the goddess, not the male god.
>> In places like
Central Asia and Siberia,
where the female shaman
or shamaness, if you wish,
was one of the
great power sources.
And obviously, the different
saints and-- and holy women
of places like China and--
and India and within other
societies like Norse
tradition, where-- where--
with the very fierce
shield maidens and things
like this that-- that
would go out in battle
and be more powerful
than the many men.
But probably the last
vestige of this female role
came down to us
through Greek tradition
as the-- as the Amazon,
these incredible warriors,
this warrior caste that
supposedly only contained
females.
The Amazons weren't a
single tribe, though.
They seem to be a
buzzword for a number
of different female
societies that--
that survived in various
parts of the ancient world.
For instance, there were
Amazons in the Sahara.
There's lots of stories to do
with their-- their great deeds
there.
There were Amazons in
the area of the Caucasus,
what today is Georgia and
of the Russian steppes.
There were others in
the Ural and the--
and the Altai Mountains.
So they weren't
necessarily all one tribe.
But what they
seemed to represent
was the last vestige of
this-- this female caste that
were the rulers, if you like,
of their domain, of their world.
And it was something
that they did
without the necessity of men,
other than for reproduction
purposes.
I think that the key
to understanding this
is that the role of
the female in the past
was much, much more
powerful, much more stronger,
than we give it credit for.
And it could well
be that when we
look at the-- the builders of
Gobekli Tepe or the Anunnaki
or those who built Stonehenge
were mainly female priesthoods.
And it's difficult to even
conceive of it in a way.
But it is strongly possible,
so we should never rule it out.
And we should always--
always be genderless,
as far as those
ancestors who gave us
this legacy of the
ancient wisdom.
>> Could it be possible that
references in ancient text
allude to a mother goddess
before the first civilization?
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> When we take a look at the
first chapters from the Book
of Genesis about the creation,
the garden, et cetera,
many events are not
in the biblical texts.
Sumerian texts give incredible
additional information,
whether it is in Gnostic ones
or in the Enuma Elish, which
is the Babylon text
about the creation.
What's interesting
is that they all
mention a mother goddess
that comes from the depths.
Sophia is the
mother of the abyss
because, as the
story goes, she went
to the deepest
point of the abyss
in order to create the
world as we know it.
In Gnostic, Sumerian,
even Egyptian texts,
the abyss is always linked
to the process of creation.
All mother goddesses were.
>> Sophia really comes from
a Greek term, "sophos,"
which means "wisdom."
In the beginning,
before there was even
a god or a creative force,
everything was dark.
Nothing existed.
And because God and
wisdom and knowledge
are simultaneous
with each other,
they figured, well,
if that's the case,
then wisdom must have
existed in the dark.
And in order for it
to be procreative,
it had to be feminine.
So they created this concept
of a divine feminine person,
a woman, who embodied the
whole perfection of the wisdom
and all the sum knowledge
of everything that
exists in the universe.
So the Greeks show up, and
they called her "Sophia,"
based on "sophos,"
the term for "wisdom."
>> If wisdom emerged from the
darkness and its procreative
nature was feminine by
some early accounts,
then why at some point was
it forgotten or switched?
In the biblical stories of
the garden of Eden, Yahweh--
or God-- forbids the
humans in the garden
to partake from the
forbidden tree of knowledge.
When a serpent seduces Eve to
eat an apple from this tree,
it leads to mankind's
expulsion from the garden
and thereby from eternal life.
But according to Anton
Parks, the Sumerian texts
interpret this
story differently.
They suggest that the
serpent approaches the woman
as if she is the teacher.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In the Book of Genesis, we
know that before patriarchy
came about, there
was a matriarchy.
When these gods arrive on
Earth and settle in Eden
on Kharsag Mountain.
They were all under
a matriarchal system,
and Ninmah was their queen.
The very interesting tablets
of Eden express that.
The woman is collecting
fruits for the colony,
and we understand that the man
was doing more manual work.
The text states that the secret
was given by the serpent.
The serpent tells the woman, and
then she goes to tell the man.
The so-called secret
that the serpent
is going to tell the woman,
found in Sumerian tablets,
is the secret of tool making.
Quite simply, the tool,
which is expressed
as "ngis" in Sumerian,
means "tree" and "tool."
One could wonder
why Enki insists
on getting this particular
secret through to the humans.
Well, he has a desire
to set them free.
It is very clear.
You can see it well.
He wants to liberate them.
I think that he didn't enjoy
watching slaves working
in the fields, serving Enlil.
The woman's
intelligence is often
mentioned in Gnostic
texts about the garden.
The woman is generally
wise, intelligent.
She is enlightened from
motherhood, from the origins,
and has the intelligence
and wisdom of the serpent.
If we read the original
Sumerian texts,
the woman only passes
on the information
that was given to
her by the serpent.
The civilizing
tool for mankind is
to become self-sufficient
and free itself from slavery.
What's more, in Sumerian
tablets of Eden, when the woman
messenger is mentioned,
she is very often
called the "wise woman."
>> If there was a wise woman,
where did she disappear to?
Researchers like
Freddy Silva have
discovered that
other stories that
empower women in
ancient evolution
have been omitted
from the Bible.
>> One of the greatest examples
of the shift from matriarchal
to patriarchal society really
evolves around the story
of Jesus, believe it or not.
It's a huge misconstruct.
And we know this because two
of the most important pieces
of evidence, which were the
gospels of Philip and Thomas,
were banned by the Church
until they were inconveniently
found by two goat herders in
the desert at Nag Hammadi.
And the idea was that when
you joined a secret mysticism
school, you joined
as a son of a woman.
When you graduated
from that, you
went up to another
level of understanding.
You graduated as a son of a man.
If you got to the next stage,
you became son of the gods.
And then-- and this is the
most interesting part--
when you actually went into
the final initiation process--
and "initiation" means
"to become conscious."
That's what the word means--
you undertook a
out-of-body experience.
It was an induced
near-death experience
where you took a narcotic,
almost like a poison, which
lowers your heartbeat
down to a point where
you are virtually comatose.
Back in those days,
those sects held
that the women had the
highest level of initiation.
They actually were
responsible for the initiate
while he or she undertook
this out-of-body experience.
They were called the "bees" or
the "watchtower," the "flock,"
which is actually
Mary Magdalene's name,
"Migdal-Eder," the
"watchtower of the flock."
Your soul leaves the body
anywhere between three to seven
days.
And you come back into your
body a little bit groggy.
And you are taken out by the
priestesses onto a mound.
And the first thing
you see is the rising
of Venus, the morning star,
at the spring equinox.
That's why Jesus compares
himself to the morning star.
So did Osiris in Egypt, who
was also a disembodied man who
gets chopped up by 72 people.
Of course, he
reconstitutes himself,
which is the symbol of the
resurrected in a human being.
The shift from
matriarchal to patriarchal
really happens around the
time where the Catholic Church
is beginning to find its roots,
when fundamental Christianity
splits from Gnostic
Christianity.
And the fundamentalists
were killing
all the Gnostic Christians.
>> Could it really be true
that details about the ages
of matriarchal rule were
censored from some ancient
text?
Freddy Silva has
discovered a similar text
to the Gnostic story
about Mary Magdalene that
is written in the Quran.
>> Two most important people,
John the Baptist and Mary
Magdalene, are basically given
very minor roles in the Bible.
And now we know why, because
we have the patriarchal system
that takes away the
concept of the matriarchal
being the most important
part of initiation.
And then they went off
and killed everybody
around the Middle East
that could say otherwise.
That's the one thing
that they-- all the sects
have in common,
including early Islam,
by the way, that says
exactly the same thing,
that the actual crucifixion
didn't really take place.
And the person that actually
was crucified in the real event
was actually not Jesus.
It was a guy called
Simon of Cyrene.
This is the-- you know,
the Quran saying this.
So the Church annihilates
everybody else
that was saying the
complete opposite.
And that's why we now have a
patriarchal system, instead of
a matriarchal system.
So that's how easily this
concept gets taken apart.
>> I think in the past, female
cultures have been given a--
a bad press.
We know about kingship.
We know about great
battles fought by men.
And we know that
whole civilization
seems to be focused around
patriarchal societies.
But clearly, that was not the
case in prehistoric times.
It would seem as if the female
had a much stronger role
in society and may even
have been the controlling
influences governing the places
of power, which would have been
seen as the axis mundi, the
axis of the Earth, possibly
even having a seat of power,
you know, the origin of what
we would call the throne today.
So in many ways, they
were the first kings.
They were the embodiment
of life itself.
From them, all life
came, of course,
as it's only women
that can bear children.
And this was understood by
men, recognized and honored
by men, who had a
different role in life.
I mean, as to exactly
what that was,
we don't want to stereotype
any of these images.
But something changed over time.
>> If this is indeed true, what
has changed since the early
ages where a matriarchal society
governed our planet peacefully?
Anton Parks believes that
the rise of patriarchy
began when humans decided
to go out on their own
and start building cities.
According to his research,
the Sumerian texts
show us how the war
between Enki and Enlil
is reflected in the origin
of the struggle for power
between men and women.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> If you try to distinguish
between the two energies that
drive matriarchy and patriarchy,
we can find it in all the texts
that speak of this.
It is constantly the fight
between Mars and Venus,
war and peace, finding a
balance between the two.
With my research
on Sumerian Eden,
I found a historical event.
We are not speaking
about legends here,
but of the history of Sumer.
It is about the two cities
who are fighting each other.
Both of them were part
of the realm of Umma.
The two towns were
situated in front
of the realm of
Shirpurla, which means
the "bird of eternal youth."
The Shirpurla realm
is led by Enlil.
If you translate the
Sumerian term "uma na,"
you get the
following definition,
"the people of Umma" or "the
people of the wise woman,"
because "Umma," means "the
wise woman" in Sumerian.
Here's the idea of
wise woman again,
of the woman who
passed down the secret.
Thanks to this
definition, we understand
that Umma was under the
guardianship of some goddesses
that were associated with
Enki and with the knowledge
of the gods because, in French,
a wise woman, literally "sage
femme," is a midwife.
And for Sumerians,
it is the woman
in charge of the genetics,
the one in charge
of the artificial matrices.
The play on words is between
"sage femme," midwife,
and "femme sage," wise woman.
Therefore, it is the realm led
by the mother goddess and Enki.
Between the two realms is a
stretch of land, a palm grove.
It is a sort of small
garden called the "Guedena."
This can be translated as
the "frontier of the plane."
In this historical battle
between the two realms,
we find many elements that can
be linked to the Sumerian Eden.
Through this story,
we understand
that the dispute
between Enki and Enlil
never really had an end.
Even if you study the
text very thoroughly,
it is impossible to know what
put an end to these conflicts
between Umma and Shirpurla.
The one thing we know
is that one city of Umma
was wiped out quickly.
Kings always mentioned
the divine protection
given by Enlil and his
son in royal texts,
always reducing the
inhabitants of Umma
to simple workers that
were only good to serve
the realm of Lagash and to
submit to the patriarchal gods.
>> Could there be more evidence
of this throughout history?
>> About 5,000 years ago, when
you get the emergence of--
at least in our timeline, of the
first-- the first great cities.
And that seems to be when
this testosterone-driven male
aggression and anger start
to take everything over.
And-- and the goddess
is phased out.
We still have goddesses,
but they're not
running the world
anymore, the way
they appear to have done
in much more-- in much
more ancient times.
There's a clear
change of emphasis,
and we start having male gods.
And they're often very angry and
aggressive and domineering male
gods.
And they want to go take
other people's stuff.
It's as though some
sort of mental virus
has entered the world.
And-- and we've
become these creatures
fizzing with testosterone,
making war upon one another.
You'd be hard put to
find evidence of warfare
in the upper paleolithic, when
the goddess ruled the world.
There was no-- there
was no warfare.
These people, they
were hunting animals.
But they weren't
killing each other,
not in large
numbers at any rate.
They may have had the odd
fight, but they weren't--
they weren't making
war upon one another.
But you come down
into the neolithic,
as we begin to see the
goddess cult trailing off
and male gods
taking their place,
and warfare becomes a very key
element of-- of human behavior.
And so I think that--
I think that an old ethic and an
old way of doing things, which
was harmonious and
beautiful and was sustained
for tens of thousands
of years, was overthrown
by the upsurge of the male ego.
And I would tie that very
much at its worst to the time
of the emergence of the-- of the
first cities, you know, from--
in our historical timeline,
ancient Sumer, for example.
>> As patriarchy
took over matriarchy,
women lost their
place in society.
Their role as goddesses
and spiritual leaders
was undermined by
a new perspective.
Women were indoctrinated as
untrustworthy seductresses.
Sean Stone describes
how this point of view
marked an era of separation
between men and women.
>> In the old tradition was
really a joint male/female
partnership.
Over the course of
Sumerian time, we
recognize that
Enki seems to have
been considered more of that--
that trickster character,
more of the devil
in the garden who essentially
gives humans knowledge.
When Enki gives humans the right
to procreate with each other
without the permission
of the gods,
that's when Enlil
and the other gods
feel that their reign is being
threatened by the humans.
So Enki seems to
become the devil.
He's cast in the devil
role and perhaps women,
as well, as a result because
that whole concept of man
and woman, Enki and
Enma, working together
to fashion humankind is lost.
So by the time you come to the
Jewish tradition, for example,
you've lost any notion
of a female role
in the spirituality,
the religion.
The god Jehovah is a male god.
You see no female rabbis
in any Jewish tradition
until about the 16th, 17th
centuries-- same, obviously,
within the Catholic Church,
the notion that there really
can be no female pope,
female cardinals or bishops.
It's a very masculine control
of the religious inclination.
Another important example
of the complete takeover
of-- of society
by patriarchs has
occurred by the time of
the Greek civilization.
Basically, by 500 BC and
thereafter all the way
through Rome, women are
second-class citizens.
They have no right to vote.
They have no real voice in
anything beyond the household.
They are essentially
outside of the society.
You can see basically, step
by step, this dissent away
from the notion of a man and
woman working in conjunction
to fashion humanity, to
essentially guide humanity.
It becomes more and more the
assertion of the male energy,
the male totem, basically.
And that ultimately,
I would say,
manifests itself in the
overall nature of our society.
If you look at what Tesla
was looking, for example,
at the nature-- the nature of
energy creation and production,
he was pointing out that what we
have is explosive energy, which
is male.
It's basically a male exertion,
whereas the female energy
is considered more vortical.
So only a few of
the scientists that
were looking into alternative
forms of energy that basically
was more vortical, what
people describe by UFO craft,
for example, and the way that
their propulsion systems work,
that is essentially a
female style of energy,
where it ideally
recycles itself.
>> When you look at the
origins of warfare--
and this is organized warfare--
you don't actually find
any good evidence for it
until somewhere roughly between
about 9,000 and 6,000 BC.
That's when real organized
warfare seemed to start.
And of course, that was after
the Neolithic Revolution.
Prior to that, yeah, you do find
occasional skeletons showing
signs of violence, you
know, just individual human
against human violence.
I mean, it's always been that.
But this whole
thing about humans
actually organizing into armies
and getting together in groups
and then let's go charge
against the other group and then
the other group having to
then respond in the same way
by forming their own little
army, that didn't actually
happen until after the
neolithic, by most accounts.
>> We talked about the Gnostic
tradition and this issue
of precisely who
created the reality.
Was it the male god,
the male demiurge,
who fashioned the world?
Or was it the sophia spirit,
divine spirit, wisdom,
who came into the reality?
And I think that the darker
interpretations have oftentimes
given onus and power
to the male form,
whereas the older
traditions might actually
recognize and respect
the fact that it
was male and female
working in conjunction,
in unison, to really
create the human existence.
Take, for example, the
Anunnaki stories about Enki.
Enki was this
chief scientist who
was trying to design the human
race on behalf of the sky gods.
But in order to do so, he
needed Ninmah, who was basically
his partner and consort.
>> Looking back
to Sumerian times,
civilizations of war seem
to be preceded and followed
by civilizations of peace.
Perhaps it's possible that
humanity will embrace again
a future cycle of
matriarchy, a society where
we become more cooperative
and less aggressive.
>> I like to look at
statistics and evidence.
And Steven Pinker wrote
a very interesting book
called "The Better
Angels of our Nature."
And he did a long-term
study showing that contrary
to the images we're getting
on TV of the warfare--
and of course, the images
we're getting are very real.
We need to solve that.
They're very important issues
that we needed to deal with.
But overall,
statistically, warfare
has been declining over
a fairly long period.
So we're seeing this
general progression
of a generally less violent,
less warlike global society.
But corresponding
with that is we've
seen the role of women increase
during the same period of time.
I believe that there's a
relationship between that.
I think the more that women
have a role in governance
and in equality, we're going
to see more of that trend
happen, because back in the
days, going back much earlier
when we didn't really have
organized human warfare,
they were much more matriarchal.
So shifting the power
balance to patriarchy,
there are probably all kinds
of biological reasons for that.
They were the ones who had to
go out and hunt the mastodon
while the woman is giving life.
And so that shift between
what we have in our DNA as men
and as women because of
that old role probably
then affects the level of
violence in-- in our society.
>> The disappearing wise
woman to me refers to our--
our loss of intuition,
our heart intelligence,
which should be
our guiding light.
To be whole, we need
both intuition and logic,
which is kind of the feminine
and the masculine principles.
You need some structure
to your intuition, or else
you kind of-- you
could get delusional
without some structure.
We've been cut off from
the heart intelligence.
And all we have is this
logical, rational, egoic mind.
And that's when we start really
going down the path of error.
And I do believe there are
signs now that we're starting
to hopefully correct
the situation as more
and more people are,
you know, returning
to that kind of inner
voice, you know,
that voice that-- the light
of conscience, really.
It's the light of conscience.
I think we'll get back
to a state of wholeness.
>> If wholeness is the meaning
of joint feminine and masculine
energies in the world
ruling by partnership,
then what is our next step?
Could ancient history lead us
down a new path of thinking?
If we, as the
current civilization,
are Indeed returning
to our inner voice,
then could this inner
voice be leading us
to a much older civilization
that has now just emerged
from the ice?
>> You get reports occasionally
of structures emerging out
of the ice, Antarctica.
Just recently, there was
one which took my attention
to do with what was described
as almost like an embanked area,
like a hill fort,
that was found.
And that struck my attention
as being different to all
the other stories.
>> Anybody who's a pure-blooded
Indian or native person
in the Americas, their whole
haplo group or genetics are A,
B, C, or D. But we've tested
three of these so far,
and they are not A, B, C, or D.
They show ancestry either
from Europe or the Middle East
or the Middle East people
who move to Europe.
So that completely
blows the theory
that there was only one
way to get to the Americas
in pre-Columbian times.
>> Could new evidence of a
civilization much older than
that discovered at Gobekli Tepe
be emerging from a desolate
continent?
Up next, the code unravels--
or should we say, melts--
from Antarctica to reveal
a possible new species
on this planet.